.TH BOSSTERM 1 "May 2026" "BossTerm" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
bossterm \- launcher and command companion for the BossTerm terminal emulator
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B bossterm
.RI [ subcommand ]
.RI [ args... ]
.PP
.B bossterm
.RI [ path ]
.br
.B bossterm
.B \-\-help
.B |
.B \-\-version
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B bossterm
is a thin command-line wrapper around the BossTerm terminal emulator. With no
arguments it launches the GUI; with a positional path it opens the GUI focused
on that working directory.
.PP
The MCP-backed subcommands
.RB ( new-tab ,
.BR run ,
.BR send ,
.BR logs ,
.BR "mcp tools" )
talk to a running BossTerm via the in-process Model Context Protocol server
exposed on
.IR http://127.0.0.1:<port>/ .
They require an instance to be running and MCP to be enabled
.RB ( "bossterm mcp on" ).
The other subcommands
.RB ( config ,
.BR attach ,
.BR "mcp status" ,
.BR "mcp on" ,
.BR "mcp off" )
work without a running instance: they read or write
.I ~/.bossterm/settings.json
or shell out to an AI CLI directly.
.SH SUBCOMMANDS
.TP
.B (no subcommand)
Launch the GUI.
.TP
.BI "<path>"
Launch the GUI with the working directory set to
.I <path>
(or its parent if
.I <path>
is a file).
.TP
.B new
Open a new BossTerm window (alias:
.BR \-n ,
.BR \-\-new\-window ).
.TP
.B new-tab
Open a new tab in a running BossTerm. Requires MCP.
.TP
.BI "run [--split=h|v] " "<command>..."
Open a new tab (or horizontal/vertical split) and run
.IR <command> .
The script auto-appends a newline so the shell executes the line. Requires MCP.
.TP
.BI "send " "<text>..."
Send raw text to the focused pane of the active tab. The text is sent
verbatim — no escape interpretation. To submit a line you must include a
real newline character; bash's ANSI-C quoting works:
.B bossterm send $'ls\\en'
\&. A regular double-quoted backslash-n is two literal characters and does
not submit. Requires MCP.
.TP
.BI "signal " "<ctrl_c|ctrl_d|ctrl_z> " "[--pane <id>]"
Send a control signal to a pane's shell. Defaults to the focused pane of
the active tab;
.B \-\-pane
targets a specific split (see
.BR "list_panes" ).
\fBctrl_c\fR sends SIGINT (interrupt the running command), \fBctrl_d\fR
sends EOF (the shell exits and the pane disposes itself), \fBctrl_z\fR
sends SIGTSTP (suspend). Requires MCP.
.TP
.B "close [--pane <id>]"
Close a pane. Equivalent to
.BR "signal ctrl_d"
— sends EOF to the shell which then exits, after which the pane's
\fIonProcessExit\fR callback disposes the pane. Closing the only pane
in a tab closes the tab (and the window, if it was the last). Requires
MCP.
.TP
.B "panes [--tab <id>] [--json]"
List the panes inside a tab. Default: the active tab.
.B \-\-tab
overrides;
.B \-\-json
prints the raw MCP \fIlist_panes\fR response instead of a human-readable
table. The PANE ID column is the value to pass back as
.B \-\-pane <id>
to
.BR send ", " signal ", or " close .
Requires MCP.
.TP
.B "logs [--tab <id>] [--lines <N>]"
Dump scrollback lines from a tab (default: the active tab; default N: 200).
Requires MCP.
.TP
.BI "attach " "claude|codex|gemini|opencode"
Re-register the running BossTerm with the named AI CLI's MCP config. This
runs the CLI's own
.B "mcp add"
subcommand (or, for OpenCode, edits its JSON config directly) with the actual
running port as the URL.
.TP
.B mcp status
Print the configured port, whether MCP is enabled, whether the server is
reachable, and the endpoint URL if it is.
.TP
.B mcp on
Set
.B mcpEnabled = true
in
.IR ~/.bossterm/settings.json .
A running BossTerm picks up the change live; otherwise the next launch reads
the new value.
.TP
.B mcp off
Set
.B mcpEnabled = false
in the same way.
.TP
.B mcp endpoint
Print the running server URL on a single line. Suitable for piping into
shell expansions.
.TP
.B mcp tools
Print the list of MCP tools the server exposes with their enabled state
(invokes the
.B manage_tools
tool with
.BR operation=list ).
.TP
.B "config [--path|--edit]"
With no flag or
.BR \-\-path :
print the absolute path of the settings file
.RI ( ~/.bossterm/settings.json ).
With
.BR \-\-edit :
open the file in
.B $EDITOR
.RB ( "$VISUAL " "or " vi
fallback). Creates the file if missing.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-h, \-\-help
Show a short help summary.
.TP
.B \-v, \-\-version
Print the CLI version.
.TP
.BI "\-d, \-\-directory " "<path>"
Legacy form: launch the GUI with working directory
.IR <path> .
The positional path form
.RB ( "bossterm <path>" )
is preferred.
.TP
.B \-n, \-\-new-window
Equivalent to
.BR "bossterm new" .
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B BOSSTERM_MCP_PORT
Override the MCP server port the CLI talks to. When set, the CLI probes
this single port instead of walking the configured port + the +1..+9
fallback range. Useful when multiple BossTerm instances are running and
you want to target a specific one (e.g. a packaged install on 7676 and
an IDE debug session on 7677). The global
.B \-\-port \fI<N>\fR
flag sets the same variable for one invocation.
.TP
.B BOSSTERM_CWD
Set by the script when launching with a positional path. The app does not
currently consume this variable at startup — it remains exported so that
shell integration (or a future BossTerm release that does parse it) can
pick it up. To open a new pane in a specific directory in a running
BossTerm today, use \fBbossterm run --split=h\fR with a \fBcd\fR command.
.TP
.B EDITOR
Used by
.BR "bossterm config --edit" .
Falls back to
.B $VISUAL
then
.BR vi .
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.bossterm/settings.json
User configuration. Persists MCP enabled/port, theme, font, attached AI CLIs,
and per-tool MCP enablement.
.TP
.I /usr/local/bin/bossterm
Standard system install path (when installed with sudo).
.TP
.I ~/.local/bin/bossterm
User install path (when installed without sudo).
.TP
.I /usr/local/share/man/man1/bossterm.1
This man page.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Launch in a project directory:
.B bossterm ~/Projects/foo
.TP
Open a new tab in the running BossTerm and tail logs:
.B bossterm run -- tail -f /var/log/system.log
.TP
Type "hello" into the focused pane (no newline — won't execute):
.B bossterm send hello
.TP
Run \fIdate\fR in a horizontal split below the focused pane:
.B bossterm run --split=h date
.TP
Re-attach Claude Code after the MCP port changed:
.B bossterm attach claude
.TP
Toggle MCP off temporarily:
.B bossterm mcp off
.TP
Inspect which MCP tools are currently exposed:
.B bossterm mcp tools
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
Invalid usage or expected failure (e.g. unknown CLI in
.BR attach ,
malformed args).
.TP
.B 2
MCP server unreachable when an MCP-backed subcommand needed it.
.TP
.B 127
A required helper
.RB ( python3 ,
.BR claude ,
.BR codex ,
.BR gemini ,
.BR node )
is not on
.BR PATH .
.SH SEE ALSO
.TP
docs/mcp-server.md
The full BossTerm MCP server reference. Tools, security model, embedder API.
.TP
docs/embedding.md
Embedding BossTerm in another Compose Desktop application.
.TP
https://github.com/kshivang/BossTerm
Source.
.SH AUTHOR
BossTerm is built by Risa Labs Inc and the BossTerm contributors.
